# pplsd_mubqp
# PPLS/D algorithm for solving the multiobjective UBQP problem
# Jialong Shi (jialong.shi@xjtu.edu.cn)



## Introduction

The code is distributed for research use. The author reserves all rights to the code.

In this program, PPLS/D (Parallel Pareto Local Search based on Decomposition) is implemented to optimize the multiobjective Unconstrained Binary Quadratic Programming (mUBQP) problem. It returns an approximation of the Pareto optimal solution set of the input mUBQP instance. 

PPLS/D is a parallel algorithm with multiple parallel processes. Hence this program requires the MPI tool, such as MPICH or OpenMPI. In this document we use MPICH as example to show how to compile and use this program.

** We also provide a sequential version of this program, which does not require MPI and hence is more friendly for debugging. Please refer to     https://github.com/JialongShi/pplsd_mubqp_sequential

Relevant literature:

[1] Shi J, Zhang Q, Sun J. PPLS/D: Parallel Pareto local search based on decomposition[J]. IEEE transactions on cybernetics, 2020, 50(3): 1060-1071.

[2] Shi J, Zhang Q, Derbel B, et al. Using parallel strategies to speed up Pareto local search[C] Asia-Pacific Conference on Simulated Evolution and Learning. 2017: 62-74.



## The mUBQP problem

The mUBQP problem can be formalized as follows

maximize  f_k(x) = x^T * Q_k * x,    k=1, ... ,m 

where a solution x = (x_1, ... ,x_n) is a vector of n binary (0-1) variables and Q_k = [q^k_{ij}] is a n * n matrix for the k-th objective. Hence the k-th objective function is calculated by f_k(x) = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=1}^{n} q^k_{ij} * x_i * x_j. The UBQP is NP-hard and it represents the problems appearing in a lot of areas. In this program, the neighborhood structure in the mUBQP is taken as the 1-bit-flip, which is directly related to a Hamming distance of 1.

The details of mUBQP are described in:

[3] A. Liefooghe, S. Verel, J-K. Hao, A hybrid metaheuristic for multiobjective unconstrained binary quadratic programming. In Journal: Applied Soft Computing, vol. 16, , p. 10-19, 2014.



## File list (the following files should be in the same directory)

- Source code: main.cpp  problem.h  problem.cpp  solution.h  solution.cpp  archive.h  archive.cpp  misc.h  misc.cpp  pplsd.h  pplsd.cpp

- Problem file examples: example_mubqp_m2_n200.dat example_mubqp_m3_n100.dat

- Weight vector file examples: example_wv_m2_6procs.txt example_wv_m3_15procs.txt

- cmake file: CMakeLists.txt



## Requires

As mentioned earlier, this program requires MPI tool like MPICH. To install MPICH and verify the installation:
```
sudo apt-get install mpich
mpiexec --version
```

CMakeLists.txt has been provided for compiling the program by cmake, so better make sure that cmake has been installed. However, cmake is not compulsory, you can also compile the program without cmake. We will show the commands in the next section.



## How to compile it

You can compile the project by running

```
cd <directory-of-this-program>
cmake CMakeLists.txt
make
```

Then an executable named ‘pplsd’ will appear in the directory. 

!!! If the cmake command or the make command is failed, you can directly compile the program by the following command. 

```
mpic++  -o  pplsd  -O2  main.cpp  problem.cpp  solution.cpp  archive.cpp  misc.cpp  pplsd.cpp
```



## How to use it

You can run the program by the 'mpiexec' command of MPICH (for OpenMPI, the command is 'mpirun'):

```
mpiexec -n <process_num> ./pplsd  <problem_filename>  <weight_vector_filename>   <max_runtime>
```

** Describes **
- <process_num>: This argument indicates the parallel process number of PPLS/D. You better make sure that this number is not larger than your computer's core number.

- <problem_filename>: This argument is the input mubqp problem filename. We have given two example problem files in the package. Both are generated by the mUBQP generator which is available at http://mocobench.sourceforge.net

-  <weight_vector_filename>: This argument is the file describes the weight vectors of different PPLS/D processes. The format is 

     <process_ID>  <weight_value_1>  <weight_value_2> ... <weight_value_M>

Note here that the process ID must start from 0, the weight vector dimension M should be equal to the objective number of the input problem, and the weight vector number (i.e. the line number) should be equal to the process number <process_num>. We have given two example problem files in the package.

- <max_runtime>: This argument is the runtime budget. The units are seconds. Note here that PPLS/D may converge and finish before the time budget.

** Example **

```
mpiexec -n 6 ./pplsd  example_mubqp_m2_n200.dat  example_wv_m2_6procs.txt  60
```

The above command runs a 6-process PPLS/D on a 2-objective mUBQP. The runtime budget is 60s.



## Outputs

After finish, the program will create a file named ‘result_final.txt’ in the same directory. It lists the solutions in the final archive of PPLS/D. The first line is the solution number in the final archive. The second line are the objective number M and the dimension N of the problem. From the third line to the end, each line indicates a solution. In each line, the first M values is the objective function vector of the solution and the last N values are the variable values of the solution. The format can be summarize as

     <solution_num>
     <obj_num_M>  <dim_N>
     <obj_value_1> <obj_value_2> ... <obj_value_M> <var_1> <var_2> ... <var_N>
     ... ...

The program also will output the sub-archive of each process, which are listed in the files ‘result_process0.txt’, ‘results_process_1.txt’, ...


## Visualization

For 2-objective or 3-objective problems, the following MATLAB script can help to visualize the result. Remember to modify the values of ‘m’, ‘procs_num’ and ‘dir’ before using the script.

```
clear all
close all
clc

m = 3;
procs_num = 15;
dir = '.';

figure()
for procs_index = 0:procs_num-1
    filename = sprintf('%s\\result_process%d.txt',dir,procs_index);
    res = read_result_file(filename);
    if m == 2
        scatter(res(:,1),res(:,2));
        hold on
    elseif m == 3
        scatter3(res(:,1),res(:,2),res(:,3));
        hold on
    end
end
hold off


function result  = read_result_file( filename )

    result = [];
    FID = fopen(filename, 'r');
    if FID == -1 
        disp(['ERROR: cannot open file',filename]);
    else
        archiveSize = fscanf(FID, '%d', 1);
        if archiveSize > 0
            m = fscanf(FID, '%d',1);
            n = fscanf(FID, '%d',1);
            result = zeros(archiveSize,m+n);
            for line = 1:archiveSize
                fit = fscanf(FID, '%lf',m);
                sol = fscanf(FID, '%d',n);
                result(line,:) = [fit; sol]';
            end
        end
        fclose(FID);
    end

end
```


